As humans, we are designed with the ability to imitate what we see and hear.
For example, we learn to talk by imitating the language and accent of our parents.
And as we grew up, we probably also adopted the attitudes and actions of people we associated with.
Clearly, the example of others can have a powerful influence on us.
Today, more than ever, we need to copy good examples of faith.
Why?
Because we are living in a time when our faith will be tested in many ways.
But not what we will have to do.
I invite you, please, to turn with me to the Book of Jude.
And follow along as we read verse 20 in the Book of Jude.
It says, but you beloved ones, build yourselves up on your most holy faith and pray with Holy Spirit.
And I help understand this first.
Think of what a homeowner might do if he knows a really bad storm is approaching.
Likely, he will take steps to build up or strengthen his home, from repairing cracks in the foundation, to reinforcing the doors, walls and windows.
Well, in a similar manner, you and I must take steps to build up or strengthen our faith so that we can protect ourselves against the onslaught of test and trials we are likely to face.
You know, as Jude said, we must continue building ourselves up on our most holy faith, which are the Christian teachings found in God's Word.
And as we study God's Word and pray for his help, we can gain strength by learning from the examples set by different Bible characters.
There is so much that can be learned from the examples of those in ancient times.
Each talk of this symposium will highlight ways in which we can imitate the faith of Jehovah's loyal servants of the past and reject the course of faithless ones.
Let's start by examining the example of Abel.
He was one of the first humans, the fourth, in fact, to exist on earth.
The Bible describes Abel as a righteous man. He built up a record of living according to Jehovah standards, but his family, however, did not.
We're well familiar with his parents, Adam and Eve. They both rebelled against Jehovah.
And as older brother Cain, well, he was not a positive role model. The Bible described Cain as one whose own works were wicked.
So you think about that. When you look at Adam, Eve, and Cain, who all displayed a lack of faith in Jehovah, can you imagine what that family dynamic must have been like for Faithful Abel?
The tension, hostility, resentment, lack of spiritual discussions? Do you think Abel's faith was tested? Indeed it was.
And today, our faith may likewise be tested by the actions of those who choose not to serve Jehovah.
We invite you to watch the following reenactment. As you do, note how a sister's faith is tested.
I arrived in a new city during the rainy season. It rained all day, every day, for a whole month.
At that time, there were only three publishers there. The first sister I met was my new pioneer partner.
At first, I felt as if the people in this territory spoke a different language.
When I tried to talk to some people about the Bible, they did not like it, and some were even afraid of these new ideas.
When government officials noticed that we had shared some tracks with the people, they began to watch us and followed us for about three months.
I felt overwhelmed by all of this and became very anxious.
I had few return visits or opportunities to speak about Jehovah. I felt lost. I didn't know what to do or where to go.
I often wondered, Father, why did you send me here?
It was like I had gone from being on a mountain peak to the bottom of a deep valley.
As our sister adjusted to her new circumstances, did you know how her trials made her feel?
Anxious, lost, and overwhelmed.
Perhaps you've experienced similar feelings when dealing with tests of your faith.
So how can Abel's example of faith help you and me?
Let's notice what he did.
Turn with me please to the book of Hebrews.
And we're going to read Hebrews chapter 11, verse 4.
There we read,
By faith, Abel offered God a sacrifice of greater worth than that of Cain.
And through that faith, he received the witness that he was righteous.
For God approved his gifts.
And although he died, he still speaks through his faith.
Abel built strong faith in Jehovah even though those around him failed to do so.
Let's consider three steps that he took.
First, Abel took time to ponder spiritual matters.
For instance, he no doubt discerned Jehovah's love and wisdom in creation.
As a shepherd, perhaps he looked at his sheep and recognized that they needed someone to guide and protect them.
And Abel likely discerned as humans, we too need someone to guide and protect us.
Someone far wiser and more powerful than any human.
Second step.
Abel prayed and acted on what he learned.
Even though his knowledge was limited, it was enough.
Enough for him to act in faith.
No doubt Abel appealed to Jehovah in prayer to accept his sacrifice.
And Jehovah approved his gift.
Abel demonstrated his faith so powerfully.
Did you know, in verse 4, it tells us that his example still speaks to us today.
At times, we may feel that we don't have enough knowledge or experience to demonstrate faith like Abel.
But that's okay. It doesn't have to be an obstacle.
Pray to Jehovah and make the most of the knowledge that you do have.
Act in faith.
And Jehovah will help you.
The third step.
Abel remained steadfast when under trial.
He didn't let the actions of his family affect his faith.
And we can't let the actions of others affect ours.
We must never allow something that another person says or does to make us feel ashamed of being one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
So be ready.
Be quick to identify yourself as one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
It will help to build and fortify your faith.
And we can also learn from the bad example set by King.
At Genesis chapter 4, verses 6 and 7, Jehovah warns King about his attitude.
And he urges him to turn to doing good.
But just like his faithless parents, King determined he knew what was best for himself.
And his actions led to the murder of his brother.
We may go through situations where due to imperfection, we don't always use the best judgment.
Or it causes us to develop a negative attitude.
But when the matter is brought to our attention, how will we respond?
You see, let's not imitate the faithless example of Cain.
Let's not feel that we always know what's best.
But let's see that warning as a loving tap on the shoulder from our Heavenly Father.
And allow it to readjust our thinking so that we can build our faith
and preserve our relationship with Him.
Well, let's now go back to our sister.
In the following reenactment, note how she imitates Abel's faith.
I studied the Bible to see how Jehovah cared for his servants in the past.
For example, I read how Jehovah told Jacob throughout his life.
I will be with you wherever you go.
I pictured Jehovah telling me the same thing.
Don't worry, just go.
And I will always be there to help you.
I begged him to help me to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage to go out in the ministry.
One day, Jehovah helped me to find a very good Bible student.
It was an absolutely wonderful and unexpected gift from Jehovah.
Our small group joins congregation meetings through the Internet.
This arrangement is a valuable source of spiritual food for me.
We get together for meals and association as well.
The experiences on JW Broadcasting make me feel that I am not alone.
And I always smile and wake by at the end.
It's wonderful to be here.
Did you notice how our sister built up her faith in Jehovah?
She imitated Abel's example and she followed those steps.
The first step, she pondered on spiritual matters.
She studied the Bible to see how Jehovah cared for his servants in the past.
And then she applied what she learned to her situation.
Then the second step, she prayed and acted on what she learned.
Her prayer was that Jehovah helped her to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage to go into the ministry.
And then she acted in faith.
And despite the challenges in the ministry, she took the third step.
She remained steadfast under trial.
She persevered and was blessed with a study.
And then she reinforced her faith by joining in congregation meetings
and benefiting from the wholesome association of the Brotherhood.
And what was the result?
Jehovah blessed her efforts.
And if you and I follow these steps, he will bless our efforts as well.
By utilizing this tremendous gift, Jehovah has given us the power of example.
You and I can imitate Abel.
And as we build and fortify our faith,
we will weather any storm of adversity that comes our way.
For the Gary Bro, a helper to the service committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium,
imitate the faithful, not the faithless, enoch, not lamek.